# Utilities

## Introduction
The `utils` directory provides utilities to make using and developing projects
in HE simpler for everyone.  The utility programs currently should be
considered at an alpha state and not completely stable in terms of the CLI or
all possible configurations. 

## What is provided
Currently the utilities provided comprise:
- create-context 
- encrypt
- decrypt

More utilities are expected to be released at a later date.

When developing HE programs the encoding is of utmost importance and usually
are specific to the problem domain. We provide two simple example programs for 
encoding and decoding:

- example encoder (requires python >= 3.6)
- example decoder (requires python >= 3.6)

These example programs are used in our testing. We used Python, however,
encoders and decoders programs can be implemented in whatever language the
developer wishes. 

Some example data can be generated by the example data generation script `gen-data.py`
which can be found in the `tests` directory.

## Installation
To compile the utilities, you must have HElib already installed on your system 
(see [INSTALL.md](../INSTALL.md) in this distribution's root directory). The
process is pure CMake. First, create a build directory and move into it.
Second, run CMake,

```
cmake [-Dhelib_DIR=<directory-to-installed-HElib>/share/cmake/helib] <directory-to-utils>
```

then run make from the same directory with optional number of threads using the
`-j` flag for example,

```
make [-j<number-of-threads>]
```

The create-context, encrypt and decrypt utility executables can be found in the
`bin` directory. The example encoder and decoder are found in a separate
directory in `<directory-to-utils>/coders`.

## Running the utilities

All utilities have a help method by passing the `-h` flag, for example

```
./encrypt -h
```

Below is an example of a basic pipeline for the utilities. For simplicity we
shall be using the BGV scheme although the utilities also provide CKKS
functionality.

1. Create a parameter file for the BGV scheme such as
```
p=2
m=3
r=1
c=2
Qbits=10
```

2. Create the context using the previously generated parameter file
```
./bin/create-context <parameter-file> --info-file -o example
```
The flag `-o` defines the prefix of the files generated by this script. If not
specified then the script will generate a prefix using the name of the
parameter file by default concatenated with a generated number. This file
prefix will be printed to the command line.

The script will always generate two files (`example.pk` and `example.sk`. They
both hold the serialization of the context and the public key and secret key
respectively.

The flag `--info-file` will redirect the information describing the algebra to
the file `example.info`. By default this information is sent to the standard
output however generating the info file is useful for passing to the example
encode decode utilities.

3. Encode some data
```
../coders/encode.py <data-file> example.info <scheme> > example.encoded
```
This script reads in data from `<data-file>` where the first line represents
the number of lines to read in and each subsequent line contains the
coefficients of each slot of the plaintext.

The encoder reads the algebra from the info file `example.info` to encode the
data in the correct format.

The encoder must also be told which scheme is being used, currently scheme can
be either `BGV` or `CKKS`.

The example encoder outputs the encoded data as plaintexts to the command line
by default which is then redirected to `example.encoded`.

The output of the encoder is a collection of plaintexts and must be formatted
as follows:

The first line contains the number of plaintexts outputted by the encoder. Each
subsequent line contains a single plaintext.

Each plaintext has to be formatted as a comma-separated list surrounded by '['
and ']'.  Each element of the list represents the slot of the plaintext
formatted as a comma-separated list surrounded by '[' and ']'.  Each element in
the nested list represents the coefficient of the polynomial in the slot.
Note, for the CKKS scheme, there are always a maximum of two elements in a slot
of a plaintext which represent the real and imaginary values respectively.

An example output of encoding two plaintexts with three slots, each containing
two coefficients is shown below
```
2
[[0, 1], [2, 3], [4, 5]]
[[6, 7], [8, 9], [10, 11]]
```

Note that the encoder reads in each line and encodes the values into a slot
until the maximum number of slots is reached. When this happens the encoder
begins encoding another plaintext until all data values are read in. If the
maximum number of slots is not reached upon reaching the end of the data file,
then the remaining slots of the plaintext are padded with slots containing 0.

4. Encrypt the data
```
./bin/encrypt example.pk example.encoded -o example.ctxt
```
The encrypt script reads in a public key file `example.pk` and some encoded
data `example.encoded`.

Optionally, the use of `-o` enables the user to specify the filename containing
the encrypted output. By default the script generates a file using the prefix
of the plaintext file and appending the extension `.ctxt`.

5. Decrypt the data
```
./bin/decrypt example.sk example.ctxt -o example.decrypted
```
The decrypt script reads in a secret key file `example.sk` and some encrypted
data `example.ctxt`.

Optionally, the use of `-o` enables the user to specify the filename containing
the decrypted output. By default the script will print the decrypted plaintext
to the standard output.

6. Decode the data
```
../coders/encode.py example.decrypted example.info <scheme>
```
The decoder reads some encoded data `example.decrypted` and an info file
`example.info` to ensure the data is decoded in the correct format.

The decoder must be told which scheme is being used, currently the scheme can
be either `BGV` or `CKKS`.

The input of decoder must be formatted in the same way as the output of the
encoder as described above in step 3.

The example decoder outputs the decoded data to the standard output by default.

## Running the tests

All tests for the utilities are written in bats (a test framework for bash)
and requires [bats-core](https://github.com/bats-core/bats-core).

Note that the tests require that the utilities have been successfully compiled
in the `build` directory and available in `build/bin`. To run the tests, one
can simply execute the scripts from within the `utils/tests` directory.

To run all tests type the command below. Optionally, the `-j` flag can use
threads to parallelize the tests. Note, this requires GNU parallel, see the
[bats](https://github.com/bats-core/bats-core) documentation for more
information. 
```
bats . [-j <number-of-threads>]
```
To run a specific test file. 
```
bats <testfile> [-j <number-of-threads>]
```
or 
```
./<testfile> [-j <number-of-threads>]
```
To run a specific test by name add the `-f` flag e.g.
```
bats . -f <testname> [-j <number-of-threads>]
```

The `<testname>` can be a substring of the test name and will match all valid
matches.

For debugging, it is sometimes useful to view the artifacts generated by the
tests. For this, set the environment variable `DEBUG` to `true` or `1` such as,
```
DEBUG=1 bats . [-j <number-of-threads>]
```
